PID Data Model alignment with ARF PID Rulebook v1.3 and CIR 2024/2977 (#913)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/credential-data-model.rst

  - **Format-Specific**: These are metadata parameters that are intrinsic to the specific encoding format and serve technical purposes related to the format's security model and protocol requirements.

- **User attributes**: Information about the User, such as identity or qualifications.

The Person Identification Data (PID) is issued by the PID Provider according to national laws and it MUST be provided in SD-JWT-VC and mdoc-CBOR data format. The main scope of the PID is allowing natural persons to be authenticated for access to a service or to a protected resource.
The PID MUST be provided according to data model requirements defined in  `EU_2024/2977`_ and **Section 2 of the ARF PID Rulebook v1.3** [`EIDAS-ARF`_], the User attributes provided within the Italian PID are the ones listed below:

- Current Family Name
- Current First Name
- Date of Birth
- Place of Birth
- Nationality
- User identification number across public Relying Party services (for example the *taxpayer identification number*)

> In addition to the User attributes listed above, the PID includes also the following information (`EU_2024/2977`_ and **Section 2 of the ARF PID Rulebook v1.3** [`EIDAS-ARF`_]):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the User attributes listed above, the PID includes also the following metadata attributes (`EU_2024/2977`_ and **Section 2 of the ARF PID Rulebook v1.3** [`EIDAS-ARF`_]):
```

- Issuing authority
- Issuing country
- Expiry Date
- Validity status information
- Identity and data proofing information 

> Some data attributes, such as the *taxpayer identification number* and the *identity and data proofing information*, are provided as **domestic extensions** defined by the Italian IT-Wallet specification. It is NOT part of the ARF PID Rulebook (Annex 3.01, PID Rulebook v1.3), but is **permitted under ARF requirement PID_06**, which allows Member States to define additional domestic attributes beyond those specified in Commission Implementing Regulation (CIR) 2024/2977 (`EU_2024/2977`_). In particular, the identity proofing information is REQUIRED for Italian PIDs to ensure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some attributes, such as the *taxpayer identification number* and the *identity and data proofing information*, are provided as **domestic extensions** defined by the Italian IT-Wallet specification. It is NOT part of the ARF PID Rulebook (Annex 3.01, PID Rulebook v1.3), but is **permitted under ARF requirement PID_06**, which allows Member States to define additional domestic attributes beyond those specified in Commission Implementing Regulation (CIR) 2024/2977 (`EU_2024/2977`_). In particular, the identity proofing information is REQUIRED for Italian PIDs to ensure:
```

Digital Credential Data Model
==============================

A Digital Credential data model has the following structure:

- **Metadata attributes**:

>   - **Format-Agnostic**: These are high-level metadata attributes that describe the Digital Credential independently of its encoding format. They represent the semantic information about the credential (e.g., credential_type_identifier, issuing_authority, expiry_date) and remain conceptually consistent across different formats. When a credential is encoded, these common metadata attributes are mapped to format-specific technical parameters according to the encoding rules of each format (SD-JWT-VC or mdoc-CBOR).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Format-Agnostic**: These are high-level metadata attributes that describe the Digital Credential independently of its encoding format. They represent the semantic information about the Credential (e.g., ``credential_type_identifier``, ``issuing_authority``, ``expiry_date``) and remain conceptually consistent across different formats. When a Credential is encoded, these common metadata attributes are mapped to format-specific technical parameters according to the encoding rules of each format (SD-JWT-VC or mdoc-CBOR).
```

>   - **Format-Specific**: These are metadata parameters that are intrinsic to the specific encoding format and serve technical purposes related to the format's security model and protocol requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Format-Specific**: These are format-specific metadata parameters that support the security model and protocol requirements.
```

- **User attributes**: Information about the User, such as identity or qualifications.

The (Q)EAAs are issued by (Q)EAA Issuers to a Wallet Instance and MUST be provided in SD-JWT-VC or mdoc-CBOR data format.

> While the (Q)EAA data model is use-case driven and may include different User attributes, the metadata attributes specific for each data format are provided in the following sections.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The (Q)EAA data model is use-case driven and may include different User attributes according to its specific purpose. The (Q)EAA metadata attributes are specific for each data format, as described in the following sections.  
```

Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes
-----------------------------------------------

> The following table defines the common metadata attributes that are applicable to Digital Credentials regardless of their encoding format. These attributes represent the semantic information about the credential.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table defines the common metadata attributes that are applicable to Digital Credentials regardless of their encoding format. These attributes represent the semantic information about the Credential.  
```

      - `[RFC7800, Section 3.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_ and Section 3.2.2.2 `SD-JWT-VC`_.
    * - **vct**
      - REQUIRED. *String*. Format-encoded data identifier `credential_type_identifier` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`. Credential type value MUST be a URN and it MUST be set using one of the values obtained from the Credential Issuer metadata, matching of the literals included in this URN MUST be performed in a case-sensitive manner. It is the identifier of the SD-JWT VC type and it MUST be set with a collision-resistant value as defined in Section 2 of :rfc:`7515`. It MUST contain also the number of version of the Credential type. Unless otherwhise specified by `EIDAS-ARF`_ and EUDI Rulebooks, the `vct` SHOULD follow a structure like `urn:it-wallet:{credential_type}:{credential_type_version}`. 
      - Section 3.2.2.2 `SD-JWT-VC`_.
    * - **vct#integrity**

>       - REQUIRED. *String*. The value MUST be an "integrity metadata" string as defined in Section 3 of [`W3C-SRI`_]. *SHA-256*, *SHA-384* and *SHA-512* MUST be supported as cryptographic hash functions. *MD5* and *SHA-1* MUST NOT be used. This claim MUST be verified according to Section 3.3.5 of [`W3C-SRI`_].

Reviewer: Is ``vct#integrity`` required even if Type Metadata Document is optional?

Author: fixed via https://github.com/italia/eid-wallet-it-docs/pull/913/commits/5ef8231ab8db81c8c85d832e0fac11f326edee32

      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - REQUIRED. *String*. URL string representing the Credential Issuer unique identifier.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7519>`_.
    * - **sub**
      - OPTIONAL. *String*. The identifier of the subject of the Digital Credential, the User, MUST be opaque and MUST NOT correspond to any anagraphic data or be derived from the User's anagraphic data via pseudonymization. Additionally, it is required that two different Credentials issued MUST NOT use the same ``sub`` value.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.2] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7519>`_.

>     * - **iat**

Reviewer: Is "iat" mapping with "issuance_date"? if yes, I suggest to add the mapping as done for the other attributes

Author: `issuance_date` typically refers to the administrative validity period, while `iat` refers to technical validity. They may be the same value, but this is not true in general.

Author: fixed in https://github.com/italia/eid-wallet-it-docs/pull/913/commits/c58eacea2e9a6a53841feaccdde19381be825616

`issuance_date` was missing in the Credential SD-JWT/mdoc-CBOR Metadata Attributes tables.

@giadas, please, check if it is fine with you.

      - Commission Implementing Regulation `EU_2024/2977`_.
    * - **issuing_country**
      - REQUIRED. *String*. Format-encoded data identifier `issuing_country` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`. 
      - Commission Implementing Regulation `EU_2024/2977`_.
    * - **date_of_expiry**
      - OPTIONAL. *String*. Format-encoded data identifier `expiry_date` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`.  This attribute pertains to the administrative validity period of the Digital Credential, which is typically different from the technical validity period expressed by the JWT ``exp`` claim.
      - Commission Implementing Regulation `EU_2024/2977`_.
    * - **status**
      - OPTIONAL. REQUIRED only if the Digital Credential is long-lived. *JSON object*. Format-encoded data identifier `location_status` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`. It MUST contain either the JSON member `status_assertion` or `status_list`.
      - Section 3.2.2.2 `SD-JWT-VC`_ and Section 11 `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
    * - **cnf**

>       - REQUIRED. *JSON object*. Format-encoded data identifier `cryptographic_binding` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`, containing the proof-of-possession key materials. By including a **cnf** (confirmation) claim in a JWT, the Issuer of the JWT declares that the Holder is in control of the private key related to the public one defined in the **cnf** parameter. The recipient MUST cryptographically verify that the Holder is in control of that key.

Reviewer: In the "Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes" table "cryptographic_binding" is described as an OPTIONAL attribute while here "cnf" is REQUIRED. Is it usually optional, while it is required for the PID?

Author: You are right. cnf should be OPTIONAL here, while it is REQUIRED for PID. I will change this in a commit. thanks

      - Section 3.2.2.2 `SD-JWT-VC`_.
    * - **vct#integrity**
      - REQUIRED. *String*. The value MUST be an "integrity metadata" string as defined in Section 3 of [`W3C-SRI`_]. *SHA-256*, *SHA-384* and *SHA-512* MUST be supported as cryptographic hash functions. *MD5* and *SHA-1* MUST NOT be used. This claim MUST be verified according to Section 3.3.5 of [`W3C-SRI`_].
      - Section 6.1 `SD-JWT-VC`_, [`W3C-SRI`_]
    * - **verification**
      - OPTIONAL. *JSON object*. Format-encoded data identifier `verification` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`. It includes the following sub-value:

          * ``trust_framework``: REQUIRED. *String* identifying the trust framework used for User authentication. It MUST be set using one of the values described in the `trust_frameworks_supported` map provided within the Credential Issuer Metadata.
          * ``assurance_level``: REQUIRED. *String* identifying the level of identity assurance guaranteed during the User authentication process.

>           * ``evidence``: OPTIONAL. Each entry of the array MUST contain the following members:

Reviewer: The sentence says that ``evidence`` is an array that MUST contain the following members, but then the members are described as OPTIONAL. Are them optional or mandatory?

Author: In the WG call (26/11/2026), we decided to remove the claim `evidence` as we still don't have a clear and strong requirement for keeping it. I will manage this change in a future commit.

            - ``type``: OPTIONAL. *String*. It represents evidence type. It MUST be set to ``vouch``.
            - ``time``: OPTIONAL. *UNIX Timestamps* with the time of the authentication or verification.
            - ``attestation``: OPTIONAL. It contains the following members:

                - ``type``: OPTIONAL. *String* It MUST be set to ``digital_attestation``.
                - ``reference_number``: OPTIONAL. *String.* identifier of the authentication or verification response.
                - ``date_of_issuance``: OPTIONAL. *String*. date of issuance of the attestation.

>                 - ``voucher``: OPTIONAL. *JSON Object*. It MUST contains ``organization`` claim as a human-readable String format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                - ``type``: OPTIONAL. *String*. It MUST be set to ``digital_attestation``.
                - ``reference_number``: OPTIONAL. *String*. Identifier of the authentication or verification response.
                - ``date_of_issuance``: OPTIONAL. *String*. Date of issuance of the attestation.
                - ``voucher``: OPTIONAL. *JSON Object*. It MUST contains ``organization`` claim as a human-readable String format.
```

   ``MjQtMDEtMDEiXQ``
 * Contents:
   ``["XcXlPVCqjHNveBCnlVPYgA", "expiry_date", "2024-01-01"]``

**Claim** ``tax_id_code``:

 * SHA-256 Hash: ``Wq3gFfmC0I9Lefw1mh-Bk5XPRtoSCg9aE23uOhxakas``
 * Disclosure:
   ``WyJLTmM1LUdrOUNRaF9UZEdicUJLSTdBIiwgInRheF9pZF9jb2RlIiwgIlRJ``
   ``TklULVhYWFhYWFhYWFhYWFhYWFgiXQ``
 * Contents:
   ``["KNc5-Gk9CQh_TdGbqBKI7A", "tax_id_code",``
   ``"TINIT-XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX"]``

**Claim** ``constant_attendance_allowance``:

 * SHA-256 Hash: ``JOQk0kuBSVk80rFlv9VGY-yiIzsfzEJKk3d4RROfzkM``
 * Disclosure:
   ``WyIyaFFtWXBIeVgtbVpKaHoyeHNVWWNRIiwgImNvbnN0YW50X2F0dGVuZGFu``
   ``Y2VfYWxsb3dhbmNlIiwgdHJ1ZV0``
 * Contents:
   ``["2hQmYpHyX-mZJhz2xsUYcQ", "constant_attendance_allowance",``
   ``true]``

The combined format for the (Q)EAA issuance is represented below:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/qeaa-sd-jwt-example-combined.txt
  :language: text

Digital Credential Type Metadata Document
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When provided, the Type Metadata Document MUST be a *JSON object* compliant with Section 6.2 of [`SD-JWT-VC`_].

A non-normative Digital Credential metadata type is provided below.

> .. literalinclude:: ../../examples/vc-metadata-type.json

Reviewer: The non-normative example contains only ``name`` and ``description``, is it right?

Author: yes, we decided to remove most of the information originally put here to avoid information duplication (metadata, catalog, etc.) We keep type metadata optional, as per the sd-jwt-vc spec.

  :language: JSON

> The Credential Type Metadata JSON Document MAY be retrieved through a *well-known* endpoint. See Section 6.3.3 of `SD-JWT-VC`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Credential Type Metadata JSON Document MAY be retrieved through a *well-known* endpoint. See Section 6.3.3 of `SD-JWT-VC`_.
```

      - [ISO 18013-5#9.1.2.4]
    * - **status**

>       - *(map, OPTIONAL)*. REQUIRED only if the Digital Credential is long-lived. Contains the MSO revocation information. If present, it includes a *status_list* based on the TOKEN-STATUS-LIST_ mechanism as defined in Section 6.3 of TOKEN-STATUS-LIST_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - *(map, OPTIONAL)*. REQUIRED only if the Digital Credential is long-lived. Format-encoded data identifier `location_status` as defined in Section :ref:`credential-data-model:Format-Agnostic Credential Metadata Attributes`. Contains the MSO revocation information. If present, it includes a *status_list* based on the TOKEN-STATUS-LIST_ mechanism as defined in Section 6.3 of TOKEN-STATUS-LIST_.
```
